Welcome to session 106.
The goal of this session is to
show you how to build an installer
package for Mac OS X Tiger.
My name is Jean-Pierre Ciudaad.
I work on installation and
setup at Apple Computer.
First of all, this is a hands-on session.
This means that with the
WWDC CD that you have,
you have a set of examples that
are the same as the ones that
we're going to show you here today.
So you can either watch us go through it,
or you can also go through it
yourself on your own machine.
What we're going to show you today
is how to build a simple package.
Then in addition to that,
we will show you how to use a new
feature in the Tiger Installer
called Distribution Scripts.
This feature allows you to take
control of the UI and also to
express requirement checks.
Requirement checks are the conditions
that need to be met in order to allow
the installation of your package
on a specific machine or on the
specific volume on that machine.
In addition to that,
it also allows you to control
exactly what gets installed
on the user's machine,
on the user's disk.
We've also provided you
with a set of homeworks.
So don't worry,
this is not work that you need to do.
This is just a set of sample code
that highlight new features in
Tiger using distribution scripts,
things like multiple CD installation
and also relocatable installs.
So what's an installer package?
An installer package is the document
that is actually used by the installer
to put files on your hard disk.
Installer packages contain your software,
obviously.
It also contains a set of scripts
that will be run before and after
your software gets installed.
It contains requirement checks
that I mentioned earlier,
and it contains also
a set of UI resources.
So how do you create a package?
Well, the first thing you want to
do is to divide your product
into a collection of packages.
Now, this is not mandatory.
You can very well package all
your files into one package.
But sometimes it's easier
if you actually divide your
product into several packages.
Why?
For example,
some of the files that you are
installing may be relocatable.
You may want to allow the user to move
some files to a different destination
other than the one you picked for them.
Some of the files you've
installed may require a
different level of authorization.
Some files require root authorization,
others may require admin,
others may not require
any authorization at all.
This is the case, for example,
for files that you want to copy
into the user's home directory.
So the best way to look at it is that
you may want to divide your product into
as many packages as you can according
to the criteria I just mentioned.
Small granularity allows
for more flexibility.
One of the new features in Tiger is that
we allow you to match one line in custom
install with more than one package.
So it will be up to you to reorganize
the packages the way you want.
A couple more things that
are really important.
It's bundle identifiers
for your packages.
Bundle identifiers are very
important and they need to be unique.
If you divided your
product into 12 packages,
you need to make sure that those 12
packages have a different bundle ID.
The reason for that is because bundle
IDs are used by the installer when you
try to upgrade from an older version
of your software to a newer version.
The way it works,
if you're installing version 2.0
of your app that's in the package,
the installer is going to look at the
library receipts directory and try to
find a receipt that has the same bundle
ID for a software that's version 1.0.
And it will upgrade
automatically 1.0 to 2.0.
You want to make sure that the installer
always has the same bundle ID for
the software that's version 1.0.
You want to make sure that the installer
always upgrades the right thing.
Otherwise, you're in trouble.
The installer may delete files
that you don't want it to delete.
So remember,
bundle IDs are very important
and they need to be unique.
One of the things you need to do before
you actually create your package,
you need to decide for each package what
is going to be the default location.
If you're installing an application,
the default location will
be obviously /applications.
A font, it will be library font.
A kernel extension,
it will be system library extension.
The reason why it's important to pick a
default location is because this default
location will be used to install your
software if the user clicks continue,
continue, continue.
So the user doesn't want
to customize anything,
so you need to tell the installer
where to put the files by default.
In addition to that,
the default location is used when
the user wants to relocate a package.
That will be the starting point.
So, to create the package,
you're going to use a tool
that we provided you with.
It's located in
Developer Application Utilities.
It's called PackageMaker.
It allows you to create simple packages.
And as a matter of fact,
for the purpose of this session,
we will be using four packages that
have been created with PackageMaker.
And we'll actually go through
the creation of one using
PackageMaker in a few minutes.
PackageMaker is a graphical application,
but we also provide you with
a command line tool so you can
integrate the building of your
package within your build scripts.
So, let's look at the first hands-on.
So what we're gonna do,
we're just gonna create one
of the packages that you will
be using during this session.
If you go to the hands-on folder,
hands-on one, Package Maker,
You have two folders, Finished and Start.
In the Finished folder,
we put there the four packages
that you will be using so you
don't actually have to build it
now if you don't feel like it.
But if you go to the start folder,
you'll see that we
placed there four routes,
approot, doc, font, and help.
So we'll just create a
package for this one.
The first thing you want to do,
you want to make sure that the files
that you're going to place in your
package have the right permission.
This is very important.
For example, in this case,
if I do get info,
and if I look at the permissions,
You can see that the file has for
owner Apple and for group Apple,
which means probably the
user on this machine.
If you create a package of
that application and then your
users are going to install it,
this application is going to
have the permission of that
user ID and that group ID.
You might not want to see that.
What you want is actually have the
application created on the user's machine
with the owner of root and group admin.
So one thing that you want to do is
make sure the permissions are correct.
I'm just going to use
terminal very quickly.
Let me just...
- Can you see?
Can you see that?
Okay.
I'm just gonna change the permission.
Root, admin, root, admin.
Okay, so now I set the correct
permission on that application.
What I'm gonna do,
I'm gonna use PackageMaker to
actually create the package.
PackageMaker allows you to
create a simple package,
which is what we're gonna use now.
It also allows you to
create a meta package,
which allows you to
group packages together.
It also allows you to create
a distribution script,
which is something we'll see later.
For the purpose of this hand-on,
we'll stick to the single package.
So, the title is right here.
The description, we're not gonna set one.
The contents, well,
I want to use this root as
the content of my package.
I want it to be compressed.
The default location,
this is an application,
so the default location is
going to be /applications.
I know that applications
require admin privileges,
so I want to require admin privileges.
Note that here it tells you that you
have to set the correct ownership,
which is what we've done before.
And this package is relocatable.
And look,
PackageMaker is ahead of its time.
It even has installed FAT binaries.
We're not gonna set any script.
And we're going to create an identifier,
which of course has to be unique.
com.apple.wwdc_handson.myapp
And then I'm gonna put
the version number.
The version number is
important because remember,
that's what will be used on upgrade.
So you have to set the right version.
The combination of the bundle
identifier and the version number
will be used to make sure that the
installer is upgrading the right thing.
Okay, that's it.
The only thing I need to do now
is to just build the package.
Here we go.
I'm going to call it my app and I'm
going to place it on the desktop.
Here we go, so my package is right here.
I can double click it.
Welcome screen, you can see...
Here in the target selection panel that
the package is actually relocatable,
I can choose a different
location than /applications.
I'm not gonna install it, but trust me,
it works.
The package that we just created
will work correctly on Jaguar,
will work correctly on Panther,
and will work correctly on Tiger as well.
But it doesn't take advantage
of any of the new features that
we currently have in Tiger.
So this package will work on many OSes,
or many versions of the same OS,
I should say.
Here we go.
So that was the first hands-on.
Let's go back to the presentation.
So now that I've shown you how
to create a single package,
I'm going to talk to you about
a new feature in Tiger called
distribution scripts.
Distribution scripts allow you to
take several packages and combine
them together into one file.
That file controls all the
UI that the viewer is going to
see when he installs the package.
It also defines the requirement checks.
Remember that the requirement checks
are the conditions that need to
be met to install your software.
It also allows you to take control
of the custom install panel.
And of course, distribution scripts also
contain references to the
packages that you've created.
So in this example,
I mentioned that we have four packages,
an app, some help files, some documents,
and a font.
So we have four packages.
So let's talk about the UI resources.
The UI resources are made of documents.
Those documents are the Welcome Panel,
the Read Me Panel, the License Agreement,
and the Conclusion Panel.
Another UI resource is the background
image that will be shown in the
installer window and of course all
the localizations for the people
who do not install in English.
So the document resources,
how do you express document resources?
The distribution script
is an XML document.
The document resources are
expressed using XML elements:
the Welcome element, the Read Me element,
the License element,
and the Conclusion element.
Each of these elements has a file
attribute that you use to reference
the actual file in the package bundle.
In addition to that,
you have a background XML element,
which also has a file attribute.
But also a scaling attribute and an
alignment attribute so that you can place
your picture correctly in the window.
The localizations, they are, remember,
a package is a bundle,
so all the localizations are
placed in a French.lproj,
German.lproj, Japanese.lproj,
and all those lproj folders go into the
resources folder of the meta package.
So to illustrate this and to show
you the structure of a meta package,
I'm going to go to the second hands-on.
The goal of this hands-on is to show you
what the structure of a meta package is.
Remember, you can use PackageMaker
to create a meta package.
You can create it with your build script,
but you can also create it
manually using the finder,
like I'm going to do here.
So if you go to Hands-On 2
and go to the Start folder,
what we have here is
a distribution script
A folder containing the packages
that we talked about earlier.
And the resources folder that
contains a localizable.strings
file and the welcome.rtf.
The welcome.rtf just
contains the welcome text.
Let's look briefly at the
localizable.strings files.
It's a key value pair with
a title and a description.
And the distribution script
here is an XML document.
And if we look past
the license agreement,
you will find an installer script
element that specifies the version,
a title,
A welcome XML element that
specifies the welcome.rtf file.
And then additional XML elements
that handle the custom install panel,
and we'll go through that later.
So in order to build the meta package,
I'm just going to create
a new folder here.
Let's open it.
Let me look at the,
let me use the outline view.
And in there I'm going to create a
contents folder and a resources folder.
Here we go.
And in here,
I'm going to create an English.lproj.
[Transcript missing]
Hands on two, start.
The distribution script goes
into the contents folder.
The packages go also
and the localized resources
go into the english.lproj.
What we have here is essentially
a regular meta package in which
we added a distribution script.
On Tiger, the installer will use
the distribution script.
On previous versions of DOS,
the installer will just look
at the meta package to get all
this data like it did before.
So there is nothing new for that.
So now that I have
created my meta package,
I'm just going to call it
actually a meta package.
[Transcript missing]
So let's double click it.
So what we have here is
the welcome.rtf text,
the title that uses the title of that we
had set in the localizable.shrinks file.
The Target Selection Panel.
Now you will notice that on this panel
we do not have the ability to relocate
the myapp.pkg like we saw earlier.
The reason for that is because the
distribution script allows you to control
all the UI that the user will see.
And nowhere in the distribution
script did we specify that
the package was relocatable.
So if we wanted to see a button here
to allow you to relocate the package,
we would have to specify that
into the distribution script.
- Select an element.
If we go to Customize,
you have the choice that we saw earlier
and we have the description that we
saw in the localizable.strings file.
So that's it.
The goal of this hands-on was
to show you how easy it is to
create a distribution script and
place it into the meta package.
Could you please get
back to the presentation?
Thank you.
So, we have shown you how
to create the packages.
We saw how to place the UI resources
in the bundle and how to refer to
those UI resources using XML elements
in the distribution script.
Now to talk about requirement checks,
I'm going to call Chris Ryan.
So my name is Christopher Ryan,
and today I'm going to show you how
you can restrict where your software
is installed by using requirement
checks in distribution scripts.
I'm going to go over the
concepts of requirement checks,
what they are, and how to use them.
I'm going to go over how to
implement them in distribution
scripts and how that's different
than packages you've seen before.
And finally,
I'm going to go over some demos
and hands-on to show you exactly
how to implement them and use them.
So to start,
requirement checks allow your
distribution script to ensure
that your software can only be
installed on a system that you
expect it to be installed on.
There are two types
of requirement checks:
an installation check,
which allows you to check
the system requirements.
Does it have the right processor type?
Or does it have the
right amount of memory?
Or the right speed?
As well as the volume check,
which allows you to check
information about the particular
volume these may install on.
Does it have the right
version of Mac OS X?
Or the right software that
your software may require?
And a volume check, when fails,
disallows the user from selecting
another volume in the installer.
So, requirement checks in the past used
a number of executables located in
each of the packages in your software
distribution to specify whether the
software could be installed or not.
But in distributions, all that logic is
located in one location,
and it's written in JavaScript inside
of your distribution script XML.
[Transcript missing]
Let's show you a quick example of
how to specify an installation check.
To do so,
you create an installation check
element in your distribution script.
You specify in the script attribute
of the installation check element the
JavaScript function or snippet you want
to run to check the system requirements.
And finally,
you put your actual JavaScript function
inside of a script element
in your distribution script.
That's really useful,
but you have to actually check
information about your system.
So how do you do that?
To do that, we have a system object,
which is global in all the JavaScripts
inside your distribution script,
which allows access to
information about the system.
We have access to
I/O registry and sys control,
and we also have a special function,
system log,
which allows your script to log
information to the installer's log.
And here's a quick example
of a "Hello World" script.
So now that you've checked
the system for requirements,
how do you tell the installer that
you do not want to allow installation
of the software on their system?
To do so,
we have a special object called MyResult.
I'm going to go over some
examples of how to use that.
So here we have our
installation check script.
Our installation check element
specifies the check RAM script.
The check RAM script uses system
sys control to check for the
physical memory in the user system.
If the system does not have at
least 256 megabytes of memory,
it then fills out the MyResult object.
The MyResult object is a special object
that tells the installer exactly how
to fail and how to tell the user why
the software cannot be installed.
And to do so,
it fills in the type attribute,
and here it's setting it to fatal.
In installation checks,
you can also warn the user
that the software may not
run in the perfect situation,
and you can set that to warn.
And then it sets the
title and the message,
which gives more information
to the user on exactly why your
software cannot be installed.
And finally,
it needs to set the return value
to false to tell the installer to
look in the MyResult object for
information about the failure.
And if you're not going to fail,
you want to return true to
allow installation on a system.
And remember, if you don't need to check
information about the system,
you don't need to actually
include an installation check,
and it will always pass.
The next thing is a volume check.
The volume check allows you
to check requirements about
a given volume on the system.
Some of your users may
only have one volume,
but some may have multiple volumes.
So with this,
you can check the version of the
system or if the proper software
you need for your software to
run is actually on the system.
Your script will run on
each volume on the system,
and it has access to information
about the volume as well.
And unlike Installation Check,
it has no warnings, only failures.
To actually access information
about the target that your volume
check script is running against,
there's a myTarget object.
The myTarget object is different every
time your volume check script runs,
and it represents the actual volume
you're checking with that function.
MyTarget has access to information
about the mount points,
the available kilobytes,
as well as system versions of
the OS installed on that volume,
if there is any, and a special receipt
for identifier function,
which gives information about
receipts of packages that
were installed on that disk.
It's very important that you actually
use the receipt for identifier
function rather than check the
contents of library receipts,
because that's an implementation
detail that may change in the future.
and additionally,
the volume check scripts have access
to another JavaScript object called
choices which gives it access to
information about the given choices
within a distribution script.
And we're going to go more
over that a little bit later.
So here's a volume check script.
Again, like the installation check,
you use a volume check element to specify
which script or JavaScript function
you want to run for your volume check.
And here we're checking the available
kilobytes attribute of the my
target object to make sure it
has at least 100 gigabytes of memory.
Now why would you want to do this?
Well, let's say your software only takes
up 30 megabytes of space on disk,
and the installer automatically
handles making sure that the disk
has enough space for your software.
But let's say your software
requires more space to actually run.
So in this example,
we want to make sure we have
100 gigabytes of free space.
So we've seen enough examples.
Let's actually show you
some of these running.
Want to do the demo?
So, go to the Hands-On 3 section.
And we're going to start by
creating a volume check script.
And true to fashion,
we're going to create
our Hello World script.
So,
Let's specify which
script we want to run.
We haven't written the script yet,
but we're going to say volume check.
Set the script attribute to
the script we want to run,
or the JavaScript function, that is.
So here we've written our
volume check XML element.
Now let's write our XML script element.
So all JavaScript functions are
included inside the XML script element.
And we're going to write "Hello World."
And we're going to use that system
log function I talked about earlier.
And to make it a little more interesting,
I'm actually going to print out
information about the given volume being
checked in this volume check script.
So we are accessing the mount
point attribute of my target.
And finally, we want to return true.
and Paul D'Amico will help
you with the installation.
So, we're going to save that.
Before we do this, the installer log is
pretty small on the screen,
so we're going to make a terminal
window and tail the installer log,
which is located in var log install.log.
And all of our logs written out
using system.log have the prefix js,
so we're going to grep for js.
So let's now run our volume check script.
Just double click on distribution.
It opens in the installer.
And notice that all our volumes
are available to install,
and our installation log says
"Hello World" from Slash and all
the other volumes on the system.
So as you see, it's very easy to create
a volume check script,
but that's not very useful to actually
check information about the system.
So let me show you a
quick example of that.
So go to the installation check example.
Again, open in your favorite text editor.
OK, so here we have a script very
similar to what we saw before.
We have our volume check script.
Of course, this one has a different name.
Specified with the
volume checked element.
We also have a new installation
check function specified with
the installation check element.
And this function is
a little more useful.
This function actually will check your
system to make sure it has an eyesight.
Let me walk you through how that works.
To start,
it checks the system I/O registry
objects and looks for all
classes in the I/O registry
matching I/O Firewire device.
If it finds any objects that match,
it then loops through all the
objects in the array that's returned,
and notice the less than sign is escaped,
and that's because our
JavaScript is inside of XML.
and it looks for the FireWire
product name equaling iSight,
and it finds one.
It sets a variable.
And at the bottom,
if we haven't found an iSight,
we're actually gonna return the-- we're
gonna set myResultType to fatal to
tell the installer we want to fail and
disallow installation on this system,
and then set an appropriate
title and message,
and importantly, return false.
So we don't have an iSight
attached to this computer,
and I'm sure you guys don't have
iSights attached to your laptops,
so if you launch this installation check,
you'll see it gives a warning or an
error and doesn't allow installation,
and when you press close,
the installer goes away.
So that's a quick example
of an installation check.
But what if our software now--what
if we want our software to be
installed on more computers and we
want the users to be able to play
with them before they get an iSight?
So let's change this so that we
can warn the user that an iSight
is recommended but not required.
To do that,
we're going to want to set myResultType
to "warn" and we'll change the title
to be a little more appropriate.
[Transcript missing]
and double click on it in the Finder.
And again we get our message
telling the user that they
should go out and buy an iSight.
It's recommended to run the software.
But of course I can actually install.
So a couple of notes about this script.
Notice that Jean-Pierre talked about
localization using key value pairs.
And that localization is all about the
static elements of a distribution script.
For example, the title, which is static,
as well as the English.lproj
for the welcome RTF,
which is also static.
But to localize dynamic elements
in a distribution JavaScript,
you actually have to
use a function built in,
system.localizeString,
and Paul Kruijswijk, and Paul Kruijswijk,
who is the founder of the company,
will talk about the new features that
we're going to be using in the future.
So, we've talked about distributions,
and we've talked about the UI resources,
which are the static elements
of your distribution and
display information to the user,
like README and WELCOME and
license information.
I've talked about the requirement checks,
which allow you to check the...
is going to come up and talk
about custom install logic,
which allows you to connect
all this stuff to the actual
packages that get installed.
Peter?
Hey, Chris.
Good afternoon, everyone.
I'm Peter Bierman.
I also work on the Mac OS X Installer,
and I'm going to be talking this
afternoon about controlling what gets
installed using the Installer and their
new distribution script technology.
First, I'm going to talk about
package references,
how you specify them in
distribution scripts,
and then I'm going to talk about choices,
the easy and custom install panel,
how you can control it,
how the user can use the custom install
panel to control what gets installed,
and how to limit that customization
using something we call choices.
So first, package references.
Each package has a package ref element
inside the distribution script.
The package ref element merely ties
a concrete .pkg package to the XML.
PackageRef elements should
contain an identifier.
This is an ID attribute of
the XML PackageRef element.
And unlike all the other identifiers
used in distribution scripts,
this one should specifically be
the CFBundle identifier from the
.pkg that the PackageRef refers to.
They should also contain a size,
this install Kbytes flag.
This specifies the size of your
package once it's been installed,
not the compressed
version of the package.
And finally,
a file URL that's used as the element
content for the PackageRef element that
specifies where the package is found.
Next we have Choice Elements.
Choice Elements refer to the line
items in the Custom Install Panel.
They're called choices because those are
the individual choices that users will
be making in the Custom Install Panel.
Choice elements also
contain an ID attribute,
this can be any string,
a user visible title attribute,
this is what the user will actually
see in the custom install panel,
and zero more references
to package ref elements.
JP mentioned earlier and showed you
actually in one of his hands-on,
you can actually have as many
packages as you'd like and tie them
all together under a single choice
in the custom install panel now.
Finally,
we have a Choices Outline element.
This controls the layout of the
choices in the Custom Install panel.
You can lay them out in any order.
They're not in particular order
in your distribution script.
And you can also nest the line
elements so that you can create groups,
arbitrary collections of software, etc.
So what is the Easy and
Custom Install Panel?
Well, it's a fairly simple question.
Easy Install is the default selections
from the Custom Install Panel.
Most users want to click
straight through your installer.
They're not interested in
reading your license agreement,
your welcome text, etc.
But if you want to lock them into
looking at either the Easy Install or
the Custom Install Panel,
you can use another element in the XML,
an options element.
You can set the customize
attribute to always or never.
The default is allow.
I haven't shown it here on the slide.
So choices.
Choices, like I said,
they group packages using the
package ref and choice elements.
Selected choices are the
ones that are installed,
the ones that the user has clicked
on in the custom install panel
or the choices that you have
defined to be selected initially.
Choices can also be invisible.
This lets you group packages
together under a choice.
Choices, as you'll see in a moment,
are where you attach your
dynamic JavaScript behavior,
and so this gives you even more
flexibility in controlling what gets
installed on a given user's machine.
Choices have many user
interface attributes,
such as title, description, and tooltip.
These are initially localized.
As soon as the distribution
script is open,
these will be looked up as keys
in your localizable strings file,
and they'll be localized automatically.
Other attributes for
choices are scripted.
This includes the selected, enabled,
and visible attributes.
These scripts can be affected by
either the machine state using the
JavaScript bridge that Chris showed
you using the requirement checks,
or user input, as in the other choices
that the users have made,
which other choices are selected, etc.
Here's an example of the fourth
choice up on the screen here.
I'm going to go over the four
choices shown in the screenshot here.
There's a selected, optional, required,
and prohibited choice.
The selected choice is
enabled and selected.
The optional choice is
enabled and not selected.
The required choice is
disabled and selected.
And the prohibited choice is
disabled and not selected.
And you can see, or maybe you can't,
way in the back there,
there's a tooltip attached to the
prohibited choice that says it
may only be installed on a Friday.
On the left, we see some sample code that
actually implements this behavior.
The fourth choice has an ID, D.
Its title is prohibited.
Its selected state is set to false.
That's actually JavaScript.
Its enabled state is a
JavaScript function called isFriday.
And we see in the script element,
the function isFriday is
defined using plain JavaScript.
It actually outputs to the installer
log what day of the week it is and
checks to see if that's equal to five.
That's Friday.
And since today isn't Friday,
I guess fortunately for you,
unfortunately for me, it's prohibited.
So these attributes are
re-evaluated very often.
Every time the user clicks on a
choice in the Custom Install Panel,
all of the other attributes
attached to all of the other
choices will be evaluated.
We also have some
attributes start_selected,
enabled, and visible,
and these are used the first time the
user enters the Custom Install Panel,
or if the user makes any changes and
then returns to the Easy Install Panel,
these will be evaluated again to
set up the default conditions.
The attributes can affect each other.
Because each of these attributes
is allowed to look at the state
of all of the other choices
that are currently available,
they're attached to each other and they
can be based on what's been changed.
For example,
you might have a plugin that you
only want to be installed if the
user is also installing your app.
You might then only set the
enabled state of that plugin to
be true if the app is selected.
Evaluating all of the other choice
attributes prevents loops because
they can depend on the attributes
of each other and themselves,
actually.
We don't want to evaluate the choice
attributes attached to the choice
that the user just clicked on.
This allows you to connect the
elements in pretty advanced ways.
So I'm actually going to
go to our hands-on now.
I'm going to stop for
a quick sip of water.
and I will close some windows.
And if you're following along,
go to the hands-on folder
and hands-on for choices.
And the first thing you'll see here is
a text clipping that unfortunately in
the source distribution here is broken.
It's empty.
And if you go to the
installer release note,
you'll find what was
in this text clipping.
It's a little snippet that tells you how
to set a hidden default for the installer
that turns on some additional debugging
information in the installer log.
But for now, I'm gonna open up the
Interaction Start Distribution.
I'm gonna use TextAngler,
which is the free version of BBEdit.
provides some nice
XML syntax highlighting.
First thing you'll see here is
we've specified using the options
element that the customized
panel should always appear.
Then we've used the choices outline
element to set up four different
line items for our four choices,
our app, our font, our docs,
and our help.
Our first choice here,
we have the app choice.
It has a title.
It also has a package ref
element that refers to the
PackageRef, which we see down here at
the bottom of the file.
We see our PackageRef
element for the app.
It's got its CFBundle ID.
It has its install size.
It has its auth flags,
its version number,
and it also has a file URL.
This is relative to the M package
that contains the distribution
script and the other packages.
To take a quick look here,
so we're gonna actually launch
this in the Finder before
I make any changes to it.
Look at it in the installer,
we're gonna just pick a volume here and
navigate to the custom install panel.
And now, we've set up some defaults.
We've set the app up so that it is
the initially selected item and all of
the other items default to unselected.
We can click on each of them
in any order and they don't
affect each other at the moment.
So we'll quit the installer,
go back to Text Wrangler.
And what we'd like to do is we'd like it
to be set up so that the font can only be
installed if the app is being installed.
So we want the font to be disabled
if the app is not selected.
So we're going to create an enabled
- Attribute here for our font.
And we're going to set it to be
the selected state of the app.
And we're gonna use a
global variable here.
Global JavaScript Variable,
this is provided by the installer's
JavaScript runtime called Choices that
refers to all the choices and this is
an associative array and the indices
into the array are the IDs of the
various choices that you've defined.
So we have Choices MyApp and
now we can get its selected
attribute just like that.
We'll go back to the Finder,
launch the installer again,
click through,
and we see the same thing we saw before,
same defaults,
these are the defaults we want,
and if we deselect the app,
the font is now disabled.
We can reselect the app and
the font becomes enabled.
That's great.
Now we can select the font
and I'll deselect the app.
Well, the font is disabled,
but it's still selected.
And we don't want that,
we want the font to become unselected
when the app becomes unselected.
So, well, we need to fix that.
So we go back to our distribution script.
We know we want to change the
selected state of our font,
and we want it to be tied to
the selected state of our app.
So right off the bat,
we're just going to grab that same line,
Choices My App Selected,
and attach it to the
selected state of our font.
Save that, go back to the finder,
launch it again through the installer.
Well,
Now our default state is wrong,
but the app and the
font are both selected.
If I disable the app or deselect the app,
the font becomes deselected.
If I reselect the app,
the font becomes enabled and selected.
I'd prefer that the font not become
selected when the app becomes selected.
I don't want them tied
that close together.
But there's another problem here.
If the user deselects the
font and then clicks on either
of these other two choices,
every time they do that,
the font insists on
becoming selected again.
And that's because the font's
selected attribute is attached
to the app's selected attribute.
Now, I mentioned earlier that choices
attributes aren't evaluated
when they're clicked on.
They're evaluated when
something else is clicked on.
And this allows the choice attributes
to actually depend on themselves.
So we'll quit the installer and
I'll explain what I mean here.
We'd like to go to the selected attribute
of our font choice and we're going to
make this a little Boolean algebra.
It's going to depend not only on
the selected attribute of the app,
but it's going to depend on the
selected attribute of itself.
In this case, we're using, again,
the magic global variable my.
My refers to the context that the
installer is evaluating at that moment.
In this case,
the context that it's referring to is the
selected attribute of the font choice.
So my here is this whole function,
and my choice is my font in this case.
And my choice selected is the
selected state of the font.
Now that we have that,
we'll try that one.
Oh, I've made a mistake.
So I'm going to open Terminal so that
you can read what mistake I've made.
I'm going to tail the installer log here.
And if you've got a bug,
the installer will run your
XML through XML lint for you,
and it says that we have a
problem with these ampersands.
And the problem is that because they
are embedded in an XML document,
they have to be escaped as HTML entities.
And this, for an ampersand,
is ampersand amp semicolon.
Once I've done that,
I can launch this again.
The installer works.
Navigate through it.
Well,
now our default selection is correct.
If I deselect the app,
the font becomes disabled.
If I select the app,
the font becomes enabled.
The user is allowed to click on the font.
They can unselect the font,
and they can select the other choices,
and the font maintains
its existing state.
So can I go back to the slides?
So that was our fourth hands-on.
Now I'd like to sort of put together
everything you've just seen.
Packages are the basic building
block of the installer.
They're where your archives end up,
they're where your files end up,
they're where you can put your
pre- and post-install scripts.
Distribution scripts now let us take
all the flags out of the packages
that referred to user interface.
In particular,
there was a whole collection of flags
that interacted with mPackages that made
it very difficult to create the custom
install panel in the way you wanted.
That's all gone.
Distribution scripts give you
one file to control all that.
You've seen requirement checks now
implemented using JavaScript in
the distribution scripts.
These let you replace your executable
or script requirement checks,
your install check and
volume check scripts,
with JavaScript that's somewhat
safer to the users running your code.
Because the JavaScript bridge
is read-only,
we know that your installation
check and volume check scripts,
they can only look at
stuff about the system.
They can't send anything out
about the system and they can't
change anything about the system.
So, that's the first thing
we're going to talk about.
We've also shown you choices.
Choices are a sort of abstraction in the
installer now that allow you to attach
dynamic JavaScript attributes to them,
control what the user
can and can't install,
what the user's defaults will
see in the custom install panel.
So, what's next?
Well, you can play with the hands-on
samples that we just showed you.
You can play with the homework
samples that we provided in the
example code that was for the session.
JP mentioned these earlier.
There'll be a quiz, actually,
in the Installer Lab coming
up after this session.
Now, one of the example code pieces that
we provided with the homework refers
to upgrade and downgrade logic.
And this is fairly important.
This is a big change with
distribution scripts.
Prior to distribution scripts,
the installer would look at the
versions of your packages and
it would prevent downgrades.
It would tell the user that there's a
newer version already installed that
they shouldn't be allowed to install.
And you had to specify some flags
in the installer that may or may
not have worked reliably that
allowed to override this behavior.
What we've decided to do with
distribution scripts is we've
taken all of the back rev
checking out of the installer.
The installer only cares about your
bundle ID and the version number.
And it doesn't care whether the version
number is going forward or backwards.
All it's interested in doing is
finding out what files are on the disk,
what files you want to put on the disk,
what operations are necessary
to make the change between
what's there and what you want.
If you don't want the user
to be able to downgrade,
if you don't want them to
go back in version numbers,
then there's some sample
code that we provided.
It's a very simple JavaScript.
We've provided some glue in the
JavaScript bridge that lets you
find out if it's a downgrade.
You can attach it to your choices.
You can tell your choice.
Don't allow it to be selected
if this is a downgrade.
We've provided some sample code on
how to implement custom locations.
JP talked about at the beginning of his
session how you can create a package
that has relocatable files in it,
relocatable apps for example.
We've provided the sample code
showing you how to implement that
functionality in distribution scripts,
specify the default
location for your packages,
etc.
We show you how to do multi-CD installs.
This has been a popular feature
request for a couple years.
Now it's as simple as specifying
something in the file URL of your package
ref elements in the distribution script.
We've also provided a JavaScript bridge
function called system.run.
This lets you execute arbitrary,
external, executable or script content.
And if you use this function,
the installer is going to put up a
somewhat onerous sheet at the beginning
of your install saying this installer
wants to run some executable content.
Are you as the user sure that
you want to allow it to do so?
Because of this,
we strongly discourage you from
using the system.run method.
PackageMaker has been revised for Tiger.
It includes support for creating
distribution script-based installers.
We're continuing to work on PackageMaker.
PackageMaker is going to
include even more support for
distribution scripts in the future.
We want you to start moving your
packages over to distribution scripts.
We think this will make it much easier
for you to support the Apple installer.
Distribution scripts are Tiger only,
so if you have a Tiger only product,
it's very easy to create a
distribution script only installer.
If you're working on something
that installs on earlier
versions of Mac OS also,
then you can use Packagemaker
to create more hybrid packages
that work in both cases.
We want you to write it
once and test it everywhere.
Because of the dynamic nature
of distribution scripts,
in particular, the functionality of
the JavaScript bridge,
it's important that you actually
try out your requirement checks and
your custom install dynamic behavior
on different machines that you
expect to return different results.
JavaScript, in particular,
makes it very easy to sort of
connect the dots and to go into
long hierarchies of objects.
Unfortunately,
if one of those objects is missing,
JavaScript will throw an exception.
All you have to do is wrap your
function in an exception handler.
Couldn't be simpler,
but if you forget it,
the installer script will crash
and the installer will act weird.
and we want you to explore.
We've created a whole bunch
of new functionality in Tiger,
a lot of it revolving
around distribution scripts.
There's a lot of documentation about it.
Speaking of which.
Documentation, sample code,
and other resources are all available at
the uber URL that they've posted here.
We have an installer release note.
This was installed as part of Tiger.
It describes distribution scripts.
It describes how to turn on the debug
version of the attribute engine.
It describes all of the
JavaScript bridge methods.
It describes all of the XML elements.
And it even gives you some design
philosophy behind distribution scripts.
We also have a public mailing list.
If you go to, on the web,
lists.apple.com,
you can join the installer-dev
mailing list where there are several
third-party developers such as
yourself helping each other out,
writing their installers,
working around bugs in the installer,
finding new cool things you
can do with the installer.
And finally, directly after this session,
in the Tiger Lab,
we're going to have a lab for helping
you create your installer packages.
So I want you to all join us there.
It's actually a pretty
big lab you might all fit.